hello this is Prussia Tucker here are
five facts that everyone should know
about the mathematical constant pi fact
number one the definition pi is the
ratio of the circumference of a circle
to its diameter that is pi equals the
circumference divided by the diameter
what's special is this is true for every
single circle whether the circle is very
big or whether the circle is very small
pi will always be the ratio of the
circumference to the diameter for every
single circle back to number two pi is
irrational pi is equal to approximately
3.14159265 three and so on the decimal
form continues on forever and it never
repeats the fraction 22 over 7 is
accurate to two decimal places and the
fraction 355 over 113 is accurate to 6
decimal places but because pi is
irrational
there is no fraction a over B where a
and B are integers that will be exactly
equal to pi pi is also transcendental
which means pi will never be the root or
the solution of a non-constant
polynomial with integer coefficients
fact number three
Archimedes estimated pi more than 2,000
years ago
Archimedes considered a circle which had
a diameter of one the circumference of
this circle will be equal to PI so
Archimedes thought he could estimate the
circumference of the circle
by considering drawing a hexagon inside
of the circle the perimeter of this
hexagon will be clearly less than the
circumference of the circle which is PI
our committees also consider drawing
hexagon around the circle now the
perimeter of this hexagon will be larger
than the circumference of the circle so
we can have an upper bound for pi using
trigonometry our committees could
calculate the perimeter of the hexagon
and estimate pi
he then ingeniously doubled the number
of sides and considered the same
argument for a 12 gun he doubled the
number of sides again and considered the
argument for 24 gun he could calculate
these perimeters of the inscribed and
circumscribed perimeters to get and
lower bound and upper bound for pi he
got all the way to the 96th gun in which
he found that pi must be wedged between
223 over 71 and 22 over 7 this gave him
an approximation that pie is about 3.14
which was very good and often practical
fact number 4 pi can be expressed in
many infinite series this is my favorite
infinite series pi over 4 equals 1 minus
1/3 plus 1/5 minus 1/7 plus 1/9 and so
on as the alternating sum of odd
fractions this is the Leibnitz formula
which was also discovered by the indian
mathematician Madhava another formula is
PI squared over 6 is equal to 1 over 1
squared plus 1 over 2 squared plus 1
over 3 squared and so on this formula
was found by Euler and it's a beautiful
relationship between the numbers and pi
there are also many complicated infinite
series this is one similar to 1 the
Indian
petition Ramanujan would have come up
with and these types of formulas are
used in the Chad Knauss key algorithm
which is how pi is determined
algorithmically on computers fact 5 pi
comes up in probability here's a drawing
of the normal curve or the bell curve
which you've seen in statistics class to
describe many different data the
equation of the curve is e to the power
of minus 1/2 x squared divided by the
square root of 2 pi so even in
probability pi is a very important
constant and it comes up consider
Buffon's needle problem imagine randomly
dropping a needle of length L on a floor
where the lines are one unit apart
what's the probability the needle will
intersect with one of the lines the
answer is 2 times the length of the
needle divided by PI so unexpectedly pi
comes up even in probability I hope you
liked this video please subscribe to my
channel I make videos on math and game
theory you can get my books listed on my
website follow my blog bind your
decisions follow my decisions on
Facebook on Google+ catch me on at
pressure Locker on Twitter Instagram and
Tumblr and you can support me on patreon